Just by adding the OAuth2 dependencies, the client-secret ID,
everything was set up for us by Spring Boot.
Now Spring Boot takes an opinionated view of what you want to
configure based on certain environmental factors like what you
added to the class path or what you had configured in your
application context amongst other things.
Spring Boot does this via these autoconfiguration classes.
In the Spring Boot autoconfigure package,
the Spring factory is located in the META- INF folder.
You can see all the autoconfig classes that are bootstrapped.
There are a number of Spring Security and OAuth2 autoconfiguration classes.
The SecurityAutoConfiguration plugged in the delegating filter
proxy into the embedded Tomcat web server.
OAuth2ClientAutoconfiguration is what set up our
application as an OAuth2 client.
Firstly, it defines the order,
stating it needs to be configured before the SecurityAutoConfiguration class.
ConditionalOnClass states that the following classes need to be in
application class path to activate this configuration.
The final one checks if it is a web app.
Basically,
because our application is a web app and the ClientRegistration class
is in the OAuth2 client dependency we just added,
Spring Boot triggered this autoconfiguration as it
assumed that's what we wanted.
If this, however, wasn't the intention,
we can let Spring Boot know not to configure this autoconfiguration by adding
the exclude to your Spring Boot application annotation.
Now back to the config class.
Once the conditions are satisfied, two config classes are imported.
These do the actual work.
OAuth2ClientRegistrationRespository Configuration activated when we
registered our clients in the properties files.
It sets up the ClientRegistrationRepository,
which manages access to all the client registrations.
A client registration contains all the metadata about a client registered
with a provider such as their registration and clientId,
the clientSecret, the scopes it will send to the authorization endpoint,
the authorization grant this client will perform,
ProviderDetails like the authorization endpoint URI,
userinfo endpoint, token URI amongst other things,
everything needed to initiate the OAuth2 or OpenID
Connect flow and to authorize the client.
If you recall,
we only have to provide the client-id and secret to
configure sign-in with Google and Facebook.
How about the other data?
Well that's retrieved from Spring Boot's CommonOAuth2Provider enum.
You can see the details for Google, Facebook,
Okta, and GitHub, all the default config needed like the scopes.
For Google, we have OpenID as its OpenID Connect provider.
For Facebook, since it's not an OpenID Connect provider,
we have the Facebook Connect scopes and all the nuance
configuration for each provider,
like the authorizationUri where the client can request the access code,
the tokenUri where the client can exchange the access code for the access token,
and optionally a refresh token,
the JW keyset URI where our clients can get the public keys from
providers to verify the signature of the tokens,
userinfo endpoint where the client can use the access token
to get more information about the user.
UserNameAttributeName indicates which claim returned uniquely
identify the principal and can be used for the username.
Now you can see the benefits of using OpenID Connect.
For the OpenID Connect providers, the userinfo endpoint is always the same,
/userinfo, and the username claim is always the subject.
Whereas for each of the OpenID Connect providers, it could vary.
You would need to check the provider specification.
Now for Facebook and Git, Spring have done this for us, and it's the id claim.
Now you can override any of these attributes in your properties files.
If we change the scope for Google,
you can now see our authorization redirect only
includes the OpenID Connect scope.
You can change the client-name,
which will change the display name of the provider in the default login page.
And you can change the registration ID by adding the property provider.
The OAuth2ClientRegistrationRepository Configuration class,
by default,
creates an in-memory client registration repository and
adds the client registrations to it.
A client registration repository is just that.
It's a repository for client registrations.
It has one method, findyByRegistrationId, which returns a ClientRegistration.
Now in your application,
you might want to store the ClientRegistration metadata
somewhere else like in a database perhaps.
Hence,
you can provide your own implementation of the client registration
repository and add it to the application context.
And as you can see, because of the ConditionalOnMissingBean annotation,
Spring Boot would then back off.
Now if we didn't provide these properties,
we would have to programmatically expose the
ClientRegistrationRepository as a bean.
The other configuration class, OAuth2WebSecurityDuration, completes the setup.
First, it configures an OAuth2AuthorizedClientService.
Now on the successful completion of an OAuth2 authorization grant,
the client is now authorized to make the call to the protected
resource on behalf of the resource owner.
Essentially it's an authorized client.
Spring provides an OAuth2AuthorizedClient class,
which is an association class of all the entities required
to make the protected resource call.
It has the access token, optionally the refresh token,
which you can then use to get a new access token.
There is a principle name, which is the unique identifier of the resource owner,
the client registration, which has the provider's details like the token URI,
the userinfo URI,
etc., everything you would need to perform the protected resource call.
Now the OAuth2AuthorizedClientService manages the OAuth2AuthorizedClients.
It is a method to store, retrieve, and remove them.
By default, Spring Boot configures an InMemoryOAuth2AuthorizedClientService.
It also configures an OAuth2AuthorizedClientRepository.
By default, it uses the session to store the authorized clients.
Hence, once the user's session expires, you will lose the tokens.
Now this could be an issue if you're using long-lived tokens,
although best practice is to always keep the tokens
short-lived to limit the impact if they get leaked.
However,
if you're using refresh tokens to keep the user logged
in even after the session expires,
then you could implement your own OAuth2AuthorizedClientRepository
and store the refresh tokens in a different store.
All you would need to do is create an implementation of the
OAuth2AuthorizedClientRepository and register it as a bean with Spring.
Spring Boot would then back off and plug your repository
into the OAuth2AuthorizedClientService.
And finally,
the OAuth2WebSecurityConfiguration also configures the
WebSecurityConfigurationAdapter and enables OAuth.
In this case, we already have an existing adapter, so the ConditionalOnMissingBean would not trigger this default implementation.